PUBLIC SPEAKING - SEMINAR


Good morning everyone!
I'm here to deliver a small presentation about public speaking

It might sound weird that a person is presenting about public speaking....but i believe that it is the need of the hour.

Since everything is available on the internet today....It has become more about how we present the knowledge that we have to the general audience.

Public speaking is also a neccessary skill for all leaders.
All public speakers may not be good leaders, but all good leaders need to be very good public speakers.

Knowledge of public speaking is vital to those who are always on the stage talking to the crowd.

Meanwhile, whether you are into public speaking or not, knowing the elements of public speaking is important as they are part of our every conversation. It is applied to all communication events regardless of the number of the receivers or listeners.


Advantages Of Public Speaking:

1. Career advancement
Effective public speaking skills can help with career advancement, as they display credibility, creativity, critical thinking skills, leadership abilities, poise, and professionalism, qualities which are very valuable for the job market.


2. Boost confidence
Public speaking can significantly boost your confidence. Overcoming the fears and insecurities that accompany public speaking is empowering. Your confidence levels will grow as you go from speaking to small groups of people up to large audiences. This will benefit you not just on stage, but in everyday life as well, whether it be in a meeting or a group discussion.

3. Critical thinking
Public speaking is an excellent way to build critical thinking skills. Writing a speech requires a great deal of careful thought, from the audience analysis to the closing sentence. It's not enough to have a message, you also need to figure out how to tailor the message to fit the needs of your audience.

4. Improve communication skills
When you write a speech, you have to think carefully about the best framework, persuasive strategy, and diction to communicate your message to the audience. This type of thinking can help you improve your communication skills in other areas of your life. Personal relationships, social interactions and work situations require you to communicate ideas to other people. Public speaking focuses on communicating ideas. You can learn to calmly take up an opposing view, to present your ideas in an organized and coherent manner, and to defend your views to others.

5. Expand your professional network
Another benefit of public speaking is that when you speak at an event, you will suddenly find that everyone wants to talk with you. This is a valuable opportunity for making friends, building business contacts and generating business. Not only this, but you also get the opportunity to network with other speakers, some of whom may be very difficult to contact normally.

6. Learn to persuade
Public speaking has a long history as a catalyst for nonviolent activism and political change. It is a powerful way to unite people under a common cause and motivate them to take action. It’s no secret that people throughout history have used the power of public speaking to make a difference.

7. Build leadership skills
Public speaking will not only allow you to be able to fluently speak your mind but you'll find yourself doing it for others too. In standing up and speaking in a way that is powerful, you're speaking in a way that will change people’s minds about something. If you're able to master that skill, changing hearts and minds and learning how to persuade, you will be already honing one of the major aspects of leadership.

8. No fear of impromptu speaking
When called upon to say a few words at a moment's notice during special occasions, there will be no fear. Instead you'll find yourself graciously accepting the opportunity for an impromptu speech. This is a huge benefit of public speaking and you’ll stop constantly worrying at formal events about being asked to speak.

9. Learn to argue
When you present, you often need to put forward a well thought out argument. In the preparation, in the practice and on the actual stage, you will learn much about the art of argument, especially if you get to engage with your audience in some form of question and answer.

10. Be a better listener
Listening may be a lost art, but public speaking teaches you to become a better listener. When you attend conferences, you’ll hear several different types of speeches about a wide variety of topics, from people who may be very different from you. This will passively build your listening ability and note taking.

These benefits of public speaking make getting out of your comfort zone and giving a speech absolutely worth it. You’ll be nervous the first few times you speak, however you’ll quickly learn to enjoy the experience.


The basic elements of public speaking are very familiar to us....so i will just run through it.

1. Speaker

The speech communication process starts with the speaker – the person who initiated the conversation or talk. The success of the talk will be based on the credibility, preparation, and knowledge of the speaker about the topic.

2. Message

The message refers to whatever the speaker is telling the audience about a certain topic. Speakers should deliver it in a clear way for it to reach the listeners in the same way the speaker is trying to convey it.

3. Listener

The listener is the receiver of the message on the other end of the line. In private conversations, you may have 1, 2, or 3 listeners. In public speaking, the crowd and everyone who gets to hear your message are the listeners in the process.

4. Interference

Interference is anything that affects the communication process. It may be internal or external. The former may include the relationship between the speaker and the listener while the latter may include what’s going on around.

5. Situation

In the communication process, the situation refers to the time and place where the conversation happened. It is the physical setting of the event.

Moving on....i would like to share a six letter formula that was taught in my school about public speaking. This formula is not applicable to every public speaking event....but most of the times....application of this formula may result in making people agree with you at the end of the speech or conversation.

The formula is AAPPQQ

The first A stands for anecdote. Starting of the speech with a story creates a listening atmosphere among the audience. The story has to be short, interesting and relevant to the topic that the speech is being delivered about. Once the audience are in the mindset to listen to you, almost half the job is done.

The second A stands for anaphora. So basically.....when u repeat the same phrase at the beginning of every successive clause...it is called an anaphora

Given here is an example of anaphora...
This is from the speech delivered by martin luther king in 1963.
"I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed. We hold these truths to be self-evident that all men are created equal.

I have a dream that one day out in the red hills of Georgia the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slaveowners will be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood.

I have a dream that one day even the state of Mississippi, a state sweltering with the heat of oppression, will be transformed into an oasis of freedom and justice.

I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by their character.

I have a dream today.

I have a dream that one day down in Alabama, with its vicious racists, with its governor having his lips dripping with the words of interposition and nullification; that one day right down in Alabama little black boys and black girls will be able to join hands with little white boys and white girls as sisters and brothers.

I have a dream today.

I have a dream that one day every valley shall be engulfed, every hill shall be exalted and every mountain shall be made low, the rough places will be made plains and the crooked places will be made straight and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed and all flesh shall see it together."

The first P stands for Points.

The soul of every speech or arguement is the main points that it focuses on. Depending on the audience.....the presentation of points must be altered....for an audience majorly from similar fields....the points can go into great technical detail as the audience will be able to comprehend.....But for non-technical audience it is better to have simple, short and crisp points and lesser technical details. Main focus should be given to the points part of public speaking. One should always work on improving delivery and other fancy additions to the speech only after fetching relevant points for the topic.

The second P stands for punchline.

It is neccessary for the points to be ordered and said in a way that the audience would like to hear it. And some statements or phrases which create a great impact or catch the fading attention of the audience are known as punchlines. Such lines can be used when it feels like the audience are feeling bored and are not paying attention. This not only makes the speech sound good but also helps your message reach many places other than your audience....Think about it...when you watch a movie and step out of the theatre....most people would remember only the punch dialogues used in the movie...It is similar to speeches too.

The first Q stands for questions.

The main purpose of asking questions is to make the audience think about what your saying.
The moment you get an answer to the questions you ask to the audience is when u realise that the audience is listening to you and is thinking about what your saying.
It is better to ask questions that are highly probably to get "yes" as an answer because the word "Yes" is often associated with positivity and subconciously makes the audience to think the way you are thinking.

The second Q stands for quotes.

Quotes function similar to punchlines. Ending a speeh with relevant quotes often drives the crux of the speech home. If the speech is very long, quotes at the end may also help to summarize quickly what the topic was about. And it is very likely people agree with you when quotes are used because, it is not a random person who writes quotes....Often people deeply respected by the society are quoted and thus it provides a positive support to the speech that is being delivered.


So that is all that i have..to share today.
Thank you for this wonderful oppurtunity and have a happy weekend!